Hi everyone,
thank you for joining me today to talk
about a few important issues,
especially if you are a female in this
field.
My name is Bella,
I'm one of the doctors in endovascular
and interventional radiology.
I am from the UK era but all over the
place at the moment.
These are my disclosures over the last
few years.
So endovascular, what does that mean?
What is this field?
Certainly when I was training,
I have to admit that I hadn't come across
it and I didn't know much about it.
I happened to stumble on it by accident
during my surgical training.
It's important to realize that
endovascular is practically almost
everybody part is involved and we are
lucky that in time we have sub
specialized.
So you wouldn't necessarily be doing
everything,
but you will have some basic
understanding of most of these regions.
So for me personally, I do peripheral,
which is from the carotid down.
I don't personally get involved in the
neurovascular though some people would
say carotid treatment is this part of the
algorithm.
Some people would only be purely working
on the heart,
so interventional cardiologists.
But even within that branch,
you will find that some will do
peripheral vascular work like like what
Some may be involved in pulmonary work.
And in some countries you will find some
people doing multiple regions.
So they will be able to do neurovascular
as well as peripheral vascular.
So it's not limited for certainty.
And whilst we may call ourselves,
for example,
peripheral vascular adventures
neurovascular,
it doesn't mean that that's all you do.
It may be that in the country that you
are, based on your training scheme,
you do a few of these regions.
And it's,
it's a wonderful thing because the more
you can do, the more you can understand,
the more you can help and save people.
So this is basically more based on the UK
system of how many of us have reached the
stages and the training that we have.
Of course,
if you are based in a different country,
this is not applicable to you.
But in essence,
most people would go through medical
school and through medical school they
will get into some speciality training.
Some people in some countries would have
direct access to their interventional
career.
Others, like for myself,
when I was training,
you had to do other cool training prior
to coming into interventional radiology,
through radiology and I was in the
surgical pathway and then came across
that's not the case anymore.
I think most people would be able to go
directly through into cardiology,
through into neuro,
through into interventional radiology,
whichever interventional field.
I don't think the process involves that
you have to go elsewhere prior to this
though.
I wouldn't say this is a bad thing if you
did go elsewhere prior to coming to your
chosen field.
The more you do,
the more you know and you're aware.
And then of course after your basic
training you can go on to do other things.
This career is not limited to just
clinical work.
You can go on to do different master's
degree.
I have colleagues who've done philosophy,
I have colleagues who have interests in
leadership and management who have gone
on to the MBAs.
So I've evolved in military work,
charity work and sort of have nothing
absolutely to do with the career.
Like landscape gardening.
I thought the world is your oyster.
And so this is again a summary of the
main pathways.
Like I said, it's not the only pathway.
And if you are in a particular country,
you may find for example,
you have gone through medicine,
you are a renal,
you've gone into nephrology and in fact
you do interventional work like fistula
work.
So again, the world is your oyster.
I don't want to completely say this is
the only way you will get to a place.
Just understand the scheme that you're in
or the way you're intended to work and
find out the pathway that gets you there.
So without, you know, being sexist,
a lot of this stuff is,
is not just for women.
It's it's really for everybody to say
there is a lot of myths out there and we
need to debunk them.
But for women in particular,
because we have a set of role that nature
has given us that doesn't apply to
anybody else.
And sometimes that can also come in the
way of being a doctor.
So in essence,
there are fewer women the higher up you
go in most of the fields,
but it's more apparent in surgery and
indovascular intervention.
So you'll see less females, for example,
senior roles,
whether it's interventional cardiology,
radiology surgery, they're,
they're on less.
I think that will change with time
because we're certainly seeing a lot more
trainees, a lot more junior consultants.
So with time,
hopefully you'll see more in leadership
roles or certainly higher roles.
But why?
Why is that?
So a few of the myths that come across is
because all all females are just scared
of radiation and therefore they don't go
into this field or there's absolutely
poor run through training.
So they don't want to waste their time.
There are no role models and therefore
can't go into that.
And there's absolutely like no work life
balance.
The reality is,
is that a lot of these myths can be
applied to almost every job.
Even if you wanted to be a lawyer,
you could say, you know,
there's a lack of dominant high up female
figures and models and poor work
lifestyle balance,
but that could really be applied anyway.
But let's try and debunk as many of them
as possible and give you a bit of
understanding.
Again, whilst it's, it's more for women,
it's not specific for women.
I mean,
life work balance is important for
everybody as well as radiation protection.
So these are the concerns specific to our
interventional field because whether
you're doing interventional cardiology or
interventional neuro,
you are having to use fluoroscopy,
which means you are in contact with
radiation,
which means that you are in contact with
scatter.
So that's what makes this particular
niche important.
There is a lot of lack of data and
evidence, like if we were to look at,
for example,
my field stenosis or management of
stenosis,
there'll be all sorts of data that you
can investigate your research and
classifications.
But if you were to do the same in
relation to scatter radiation and
protection, it's very,
very limited and a lot of the data is
outdated.
So that obviously doesn't build
confidence for the female operator.
In particular, because of our anatomy,
there is a lack of tailored outfits or
tailored support specific to the female
body and a female body,
not just as you are but also during
pregnancy,
and that could obviously be a problem or
a concern.
Luckily that is changing and you'll see
more and more companies supporting that
and giving solutions.
Balance protection and MSK problems.
This is really, really important for all.
This has got nothing to do with how old
you are, male or female, lumbar support,
back support, MSK, tendon and joints.
It's important that in this field and as
well as surgical,
and that's just this field, our balance,
our posture is important and we find the
correct supporting tools to not have back
pain or muscular pain.
And again,
this comes with the lack of data,
but hopefully during this mini virtual
conference,
you will see many people speak about data
and work that they've done,
which is promising and I'm really excited
to have that come.
So what can we do?
There is education and further education
and education to be shared,
like in this software shielding new
technology.
And then there are practical tools that
are taught by physics.
For example,
if I'm doing an EVAR procedure,
it's just stepping back while I do the
angiogram runs.
It's just a simple step that can be done
to minimize scatter covering around
patient, around operators.
And just again,
it's to do with understanding the scatter
and how scatter works and the education
provided for understanding that.
And then later on being able to find the
tools that can help you with these things.
And this is important.
And it's down to us to work together to
ensure the future generations, you guys,
as you come in that you have the
knowledge and the tools.
It's certainly a lot better than what it
was when I was doing my training a while
back.
When I was looking into this.
I tried to find support and material.
It was really limited.
So we started by doing some surveys.
2017.
We started with trainees and students,
which was interesting,
just their perception,
especially female trainee students,
just their perception of getting into
this career.
And then we followed it on in 2023 with
consultants,
but the focus was just in the UK to get a
little bit of understanding what is going
on.
And it was interesting.
So if if I just focus on the demographics
of the survey, as you can see, you know,
a large proportion were senior
consultants.
This one was specifically for
interventional radiology in the UK.
There there were some replies from nurses,
fellows and trainees and one of the main
aspects that we wanted to understand is
what were they facing or what was their
main concerns with regards to this field
in terms of radiation protection.
So you can see a good majority have been
in this field for a while.
And this is the interesting part is that
people still respond and notice the
visible and the obvious like back pain,
back posture, wrist pain, joint pain.
But things that are not obvious that you
can't see until you actually have a
problem,
you're not going to know about it and
you're not going to be probably worried
about it.
For example, brain tumors, 0% that I mean,
thank God for that, but we don't know.
I mean,
I don't know later on what's going to
happen to me.
There's no way of knowing at this stage.
Breast cancer unfortunately is on the
rise and there is an article that we will
try and share during this virtual meeting
with you that seems to be also on the
rise.
What's important and what I would like to
stress is that this information,
what we're trying to share with you,
it's got nothing to do with scaring you
or to say that you should not go into
this field or that, Oh my goodness,
this field is really bad and deadly for
you.
In fact, it's the opposite.
It's to say that you can have an
absolutely amazing career,
you can absolutely have a great time and
be a healthy clinician.
However,
what we'd like you to do is to be aware
of the problems that can happen if you
don't take care, which is life in general.
So I just want everybody from this to
make sure that every time I'm talking
about something, not to be scared,
not to be frightened, not to be put off.
It's none of those.
It's just to say you need the right tools
and the right protection all the time
when you're working with scatter to avoid
all these problems that we are seeing.
So in terms of radiation protection,
we just wanted to get labour.
What's going on out there?
And if people felt they were adequately
protected,
and this is the interesting bit,
these are senior colleagues and 40% felt
they weren't adequately protected and 70%
didn't have the adequate training.
So just because a lot of people in their
training would have physics exams and all
sorts of cumbersome exams,
it didn't mean that it was actually
practical to what's being operated and
done day-to-day.
And this is crucial.
And when we looked at females and
pregnant staff,
was there any reasonable adjustments
during pregnancy?
And this is worrying.
I kind of anticipated that there would be,
especially as things have changed with
time and we have all sorts of radiation
protection offices, etcetera.
This was still very poor,
which again goes hand in hand with the
lack of education and lack of awareness.
Being pregnant should not stop you from
history.
You can absolutely go as far as you want
during your pregnancy with your work with
no problems.
Adjustments yes, tools and solutions, yes.
But for you to be forced to stop?
Absolutely not.
You can actually have a safe,
smooth journey so long as you are
comfortable and you're able to.
So this is a further breakdown to see
what the pregnant snap.
Obviously that responded to this also,
we didn't get such a high proportion of
response,
but those that did showed that there was
no individual risk assessment.
This is really important.
The assessment has to be specific for you.
You know, you could be a petite lady,
you could have a single pregnancy versus
somebody else who's much taller with a
triplet pregnancy.
It really has to be specific for you.
And real time monitoring is also an
interesting one.
I think this is very important during the
pregnancy stages.
But almost 82% had nothing.
So you could see that there are a lot of
gap holes here that were picked up by the
survey from things like lack of education,
lack of awareness,
even basic things that have you got a
designated lead apron,
you're a senior consultant in that
particular department working there
almost every day that you don't have a
specific LED that is specific speak to
you and your needs.
I don't believe that should be case.
And these are just images that I wanted
to share with you.
Why we in specific.
So this female has got, you know,
random lead that she's got on,
but it's gaping through.
It's not specific to her body.
So she's already got her axilla and parts
of her breast tissue exposed to scatter,
especially if she's a primary operator.
But luckily we do have tools over time,
we've found lead that can wrap around
better.
They can come and cross and cover that
area.
We found something that has that support
so it's not heavy.
So again, the point is, yes,
there are problems,
but there are also solutions that you
need to be aware of them and you need to
find the one that's comfortable for you.
But it's not just about lead.
There are now tools where you don't even
have to wear lead.
There are shieldings that go around the
operating field, around your unit of what?
So either you do not have to wear lead or
you can wear very light lead.
This is amazing.
This is significant,
especially if your field has repeated
similar procedures.
These allow for this type of protection.
So the facts are yes radiation exists and
scatter exist, but just not an issue.
There are run through posts and
specialities and depending on your
country, most countries do have that,
so you don't have to spend time
flickering between specialities to get to
the one that you want.
Yes, there are fewer females,
but I don't think that's going to be the
case forever.
I think you will see a lot more females
emerging through, but in all honesty,
I don't think you need to have a male or
female role model.
It doesn't matter.
You just need to find somebody who's
supportive,
who's going to take you through this
journey and guide you and pass on their
wisdom.
That's the most important thing.
Of course it does help if they understand
some of the things you're going through,
but I wouldn't say it's the limiting
factor.
Work, work life balance.
Now this has become more and more
important.
I definitely know in the olden days this
is not a topic that was discussed nor a
topic that was cared about.
But now as we have more evidence,
not just for medicine but in general of
the importance of work life balance,
there's a lot more being done,
such as part time roles, flexi roles,
job shared roles.
And again,
it just depends on where you intend to
work.
Open that conversation and have it.
There's absolutely nothing to say you
can't go part time.
There's absolutely nothing to say you
cannot share certain roles.
There's nothing to say there for a
particular.
In your life.
You may need flexi working and then you
can go back to full time.
All of these things now are in place and
you're able to have that.
So I'm just sharing with you to show,
you know,
normal job logs like me is able to reach
all of this,
to take part in all various conferences,
national and international,
be given awards.
And I'm nothing amazing.
I'm not somebody who is super smart or in
any form, just really average Joe.
I was able to do it all.
And life is not just about what's in the
hospital.
It's also about what's outside the
hospital.
You can have you can run marathons,
you can't go to extreme places.
You can do it all.
Now,
it's not necessary that you'll do it all
at the same time,
but you will do it through various stages
of your life.
And of course,
your work family are probably one of the
most important things in this path that
will support you and help you during that.
And I think it's, you know,
it goes without say working with an
amazing team,
it is the icing and the cake.
So I would definitely recommend everybody
find the way you're happy,
find the team that supports you,
take that job because it's it really is
the making of you.
And so again, in summary,
this is not to scare you.
This is just to say in everything,
in every shield,
there will be problems and these are what
they are.
And we have solutions and that's what we
interventions do.
That's exactly what we do.
We find health problems and we find and
we create solutions for them.
It's never about, Oh my God,
this is what it's best.
Now we all need to give up this three.
Absolutely not.
So please guys,
feel free to reach out to me at any point,
even outside of this meeting.
If you come across any problems that you
want to highlight or you want to find
solutions for, please do reach out.
Whether it's through here or any other
platform,
I'm more than happy to take your question.
Thank you for your time.
Hi everyone.
I am Doctor Linda Watkins and I'm a
consultant adult and pediatric
interventional radiologist based in
Glasgow, Scotland.
And I'm here to talk today about
pregnancy and radiation.
So I don't have any financial disclosures
or anything like that,
but I think it is quite important to
disclose that I have not been pregnant
while working in a radiation environment.
However, I am,
along with a colleague responsible for
the education and training within my
department.
So I have a supervisory role and
responsibility to those resident doctors
to know what I'm talking about
effectively.
So we're going to completely focus on the
group of people that the session title is.
So that is those in practice,
those working in radiation environments.
Now there is of course another huge group
who get exposed to radiation in pregnancy
and that is patients.
But there's really very different
considerations there,
and they're not time to talk about both.
In the UK, where I'm based,
we have separate legislation covering a
medical exposure versus occupational
exposure.
And I'll come back and talk about the
occupational exposure legislation shortly.
But it's important to realize that these
are separate issues with completely
different considerations.
So First off,
what are the risks of radiation exposure
in pregnancy?
Well,
that depends very much on where in the
pregnancy you are.
This is a really great graphical
representation I think that was put
together by Applegate ET al.
And it's really important to note that
the majority of this graph,
if you look across the top scale here,
is referring to only up to 50 days post
conception,
so well within the first trimester.
We can therefore see that the risk is
greatest in the earliest stages of
pregnancy,
less in the second trimester and even
less in the third trimester.
The coloured lanes on this graph
delineate the deterministic effects of
radiation in pregnancy.
So that's the dose dependent risks,
that's things like neuropathology,
growth restriction, malformations,
miscarriage,
and all of these peak in the early stages
of pregnancy.
But this figure also shows this block
down at the bottom,
at the bottom right and that is the
stochastic effects of carcinogenesis.
And this risk remains static,
went after the organogenesis phase and
you would expect that for something that
doesn't require a dose threshold.
But what doses are we talking about for
the risk to pregnancy?
And to be honest,
the short answer to this is we don't
really know.
The main studies that have been done are
with the huge doses of fallout radiation
of events like Hiroshima and Chernobyl,
and some very clever physics.
People have done some extrapolation
calculations and come up with this table
that's in the Joint Sir and Cersei
guidelines.
And this shows nicely the the probability
of no malformations,
no childhood cancer and the probability
of neither thing happening.
And these are then placed against the the
dose here.
And this shows that there's only very
slight increases in the probability of
either thing happening up to really quite
large doses.
There's less than a percentage increase
in all three columns up to 100
millisieverts.
Some important context here as well is,
but nobody gets zero.
OK,
there's still background radiation to
consider as well.
And we all get that just from existing.
And in the UK that can actually be really
quite variable.
It can be up to 8 millisieverts in places.
And that's mainly to do with radon either
in the earth or from a granite that's
used in some places for for buildings.
So the question then becomes what am I
adding to my background radiation with my
occupational exposure?
Now, you should know this.
And if you don't ask,
this is where wedding you're assigned.
Decimeters is really important both for
protecting you but also medical physics
can look at your doses,
look at what your usual exposure is and
make a prediction of the exposure that
you will have over the course of a
pregnancy and then be able to make an
estimate from that of what the fetal dose
would be throughout the pregnancy.
Most interventional radiologists have
have doses of around 2:00 to 4:00 milli
sieverts a year,
so even with their background radiation
many are still be below the pure
background dose that some people are
getting.
The European recommendation is to keep
equivalent doses to the fetus at less
than one milli sieverte over the course
of pregnancy.
But other countries have other
recommendation.
And that again,
just reflects the we don't.
We're not sure that I referred to earlier.
There isn't much in the published
literature.
And what there is is about 10 years old
really, but particularly for radiologists.
Radiologists do seem to stay within these
these those limits and are not routinely
exceeding the recommended doses.
So how can you reduce the risks?
Honestly, that's really simple.
Do all of the things that you should be
doing anyway.
There's something that's kind of funny
about the human condition that although
we can be really quite selfish sometimes,
we're actually better at looking after or
thinking about other people than we are
about ourselves.
So I will make sure that a resident
doctor has their LED glasses on and
brings in the the screen more than I'll
do it for myself sometimes.
And I'm sure some of you can relate to
that.
So what sort of things am I referring to?
So things like wedding your personal
protective equipment, all of it,
your decimeters, your lead glasses,
your thyroid Shields,
wedding appropriate aprons that should be
at least .5mm lead equivalent.
Use the room shielding in IR.
There should be leg protection from a
shield that often attaches to the patient
table.
Make sure it's on the side of the table
that you're that you're working on.
And there's often ceiling maintage
Shields or mobile Shields that can be
wheeled into place to give extra
protection as well.
During procedures,
we should always be taking steps to
minimize the radiation dose to the
patient.
And by taking those steps,
we also minimize the dose to ourselves
because the majority of the dose comes
from scatter,
which is going to be related to the dose
that the patient is getting.
So we need to minimize the fluoro time,
reduce the fluoroscopy rate if you can as
well minimize the air gap between the
patient and the detector column it to
reduce the area that is being exposed.
Avoid magnification when it's not
necessary for the task at hand,
and remember to turn it down again or
turn it off when you don't need it.
The most important thing, oh,
this one as well.
So also remember to,
if you need to oblique the tube,
but it doesn't really matter to what
you're doing which way to oblique it.
Oblique it so that the tube is away from
you,
because that will reduce the amount of
scatter that comes towards you from doing
the oblique projection.
Probably the most important thing though,
is distancing.
So doubling your distance reduces the
radiation by a factor of 4.
This is known as the inverse square law.
So even just taking a step back,
particularly during the radiation hungry
acquisitions of DSA,
makes a really big difference to the
doors.
So these are things that you can do,
but what about your employer?
So in my country,
this is the legislation that pertains to
radiation exposure for workers.
This is the ionizing radiations
regulations from 2017.
So this will be slightly different
depending on your country,
but I think some reasonable expectations
that you can have of your employer would
be first of all that a risk assessment is
carried out.
So this should look at your previous
doses.
It should estimate what the what the
fetal dose will be over the justicional
periods and from that then adjust duties
if necessary to to make sure that this
stays at an acceptable level.
Where I work,
we're and actually in the UK in general,
we're provided with an extra decimeter to
where under our PPE at the abdomen a
level and the estimated dose to the fetus
is set to half of whatever this decimeter
registers.
You can actually request this monitoring
the the extra decimeter here even before
declaring pregnancy.
So that can be really reassuring for
those who are looking to conceive to be
sure that their doses are not going to
exceed limits.
Some places may have the option of
electronic dissimiters to get real time
information and feedback too.
I think it's also reasonable to expect
your employer to make sure you have
appropriate PPE throughout your pregnancy.
The body changes during pregnancy and the
appropriate lead for you at the end of
your pregnancy will not be the lead that
you started off waiting at week 1.
It is not reasonable to expect your
employer to be a mind reader now.
They can't take action to protect you if
they don't know that you are pregnant.
And that sometimes means disclosing
earlier than than really you would like
to.
But it's important to protect everyone in
the situation and your employer should
really be exercising some sort of
confidential,
some level of confidentiality and it
should be on a need to know basis.
So, so far,
I've really presented the facts as we
best know them about radiation and
pregnancy,
and it's easy to look at this and apply
pure robotic logic and say it's fine.
We think the risks are low.
As long as you're monitoring things and
taking precautions,
there's no need to change anything.
This doesn't take into account several
other factors about our occupational work.
So PPE can be heavy and cumbersome.
Standing for long periods of time,
waiting.
It can be fatiguing and challenging even
without simultaneously growing a whole
human being.
And also, we're human, right?
And humans are more complex than logic.
The evidence and facts don't account for
the women who suffered through several
miscarriages or a still birth,
or the couple who are unable to get
pregnant and have used assisted
conception with only one viable embryo.
In occupational situations where there
are other options,
these should be available to those who
want to take that route.
In my institution, for example,
our nurses get the option when they
declare pregnancy of choosing to work
within the IR lab or working only in our
admission and recovering recovery
recovery area.
Equally, though,
workers should absolutely not be stopped
from working in safe situations.
Anecdotally,
I know that this has been a barrier for
women pursuing careers and interventional
specialties where they've been told,
frankly often by men in a position of
power,
that they should stay out of the IR lab
now that they're pregnant.
That is the best thing for them.
It's the best thing for their baby.
So that is what that's what they should
do.
This can then lead to them not getting
the required experience and the time
frame that they that they need to for
training and essentially can lead to them
being pushed out and therefore
contributing further to to the lack of
women in some interventional specialities.
The evidence as we have it right now does
not support this.
Pregnancy can be a really highly emotive
time topic and time for people and we
should be respectful of that while
acknowledging the facts to and not
letting pregnancy be used as an excuse
essentially.
Thank you very much everyone and I'm
looking forward to taking any questions
at the question and answer session.
Good morning.
My name is Alison Sibley.
I am a diagnostic medical physicist as
well as a radiation safety officer.
I provide medical physics and RSO
services to the greater South Florida
region.
The session this morning is called
Scatter Radiation.
What You must Know and this mini session
will cover positioning and technique.
Simple changes with a big impact.
I have nothing to disclose this morning,
so let's start with two position and
scatter fields.
Knowing where the scatter field is
probably one of the most important things
when it comes to protecting yourself and
to position is going to be a very
important factor when it comes to scatter
radiation.
Scatter radiation coming from the patient
is the single largest source of
occupational exposure.
We know that scattered radiation is going
to be greatest towards the side where the
X-ray tube or the X-ray beam enters the
patient.
And in general,
it's important to know that anything that
is done to reduce patient dose will also
reduce scatter dose or staff dose.
So let's take a look at tube position.
First,
I'd like to look at when the X-ray tube
is under the table.
In this position,
the greatest scattered radiation levels
are going to be downward.
These areas are typically covered by lead
aprons, drapes, and table shielding.
In the opposite position,
when the X-ray tube is over the table,
you can see that the greater scatter
radiation field is now upward and in this
position the eyes,
face and head may receive up to 10 times
greater exposure from scatter radiation.
Now let's take a look at oblique beam
orientation.
In this position.
Increased patient thickness causes an
increase in the AEC system and this can
drive up the tube energy,
the tube current,
or sometimes even both depending on the
patient thickness.
This dramatically increases the scatter
fields on the X-ray tube side,
which of course is going to increase
radiation exposure to the staff.
The steeper the angulation,
the greater that exposure becomes.
For example,
a 60 angulation may have three times
higher exposure than a 30 angulation.
Lastly,
let's look at lateral beam orientation.
In this position,
the X-ray beam is traversing the patient
in the thickest orientation.
That higher patient entrance dose to the
to the patient causes a much higher
scatter fields on the X-ray tube side,
as you can see here on the right.
When this position is necessary,
it's better to position yourself on the
image intensifier or the image receptor
side.
As you can see,
the scatter field is much lower on the
opposing side of the table.
I have a short video here that can give
you an idea of what the scatter field is
doing as the beam traverses the patient.
And so we can see here as the X-ray beam
moves into an oblique and lateral
position,
you can see how that scatter field
dramatically increases in size compared
to when the tube is above or beneath the
table.
One more thing that I'd like to address
before we move on from to position and
the scatter fields is something that we
call leakage radiation,
which some people may not be aware of.
Leakage radiation from the X-ray tube
housing is another source of occupational
exposure and this generally contributes
to about 10 to 20% of occupational dose.
Regulatory limits allow up to 100 Mr.
per hour.
In my practice,
I haven't seen levels that high.
However,
I have heard from quite a few physicians
that told me that in their training they
were taught to stand behind the X-ray
tube when lateral technique was required.
And so this is your friendly reminder
that you should not be standing next to
nor behind the X-ray tube.
For this reason,
let's look at magnification.
In general,
radiation doses to the patient can
increase from about 1.
4 to 2 times for each magnification
position.
Some of the newer interventional systems
can have upwards of five to seven
magnification modes.
This can provide a significant radiation
dose to the patient.
An increase in patient entrance dose is
directly proportional to an increase in
occupational exposure.
Collimation is another one.
Collimation employs a series of shutters
or wedges that help to block or shape the
primary beam,
and this will allow the physician to only
image the clinical anatomy of interest.
Some benefits of collimation include less
patient tissue as being irradiated,
which results in lower dose to the
patient,
which of course reduces scatter radiation
produced and improves the image contrast.
Since less scatter is contributing to the
overall image pulse rates,
lower pulse rates deliver less radiation
dose to the patient.
Each time the pulse rate is reduced the
patient dose, it decreases by about 25%.
When dose rate drops,
of course we know scatter rates drop.
Always strive to use the lowest pulse
rate that delivers a clinically
acceptable image, of course.
Let's look at digital subtraction and CNA
imaging.
During CNA imaging,
a single CNA frame delivers about as much
dose to the patient as 10 floral frames.
In other words,
one minute of CNA is essentially
equivalent to 10 minutes of fluoroscopy
time.
If available,
low dose rate CNA should be used when it
does not reduce the clinical visibility,
digital subtraction, and geography.
A single DSA frame delivers about as much
dose to the patient as 10 CNA frames,
which we know is equivalent to about 100
floral frames.
DSA images should be acquired at the
lowest clinically usable frame rate and
the shortest time possible.
Patient geometry and positioning.
The best practice is going to involve
positioning the patient as close to the
detector as possible.
When the patient is closer to the X-ray
tube,
as seen here in image C on the right,
several factors come into play.
For one,
the patient entrance dose is going to
increase due to the patient's proximity
to the X-ray beam, right?
They're closer to the X-ray beam and
that's going to increase their entrance
dose rate.
The air gap on the opposite side of the
patient,
between the patient and the image
receptor creates additional space for
scatter on the receptor side.
That scatter of course,
is going to increase the dose to the
staff and it's also going to degrade the
overall image quality.
Also keep this in mind when alternating
views into the ladder and lateral and
oblique positioning and also in the
biplane set up.
The patient should always be kept as
close to the image receptor or receptors
as possible.
It's easy to forget this step when you
move the beam to a different geometry.
And to summarize,
most techniques that reduce the entrance
dose to the patient will result in lower
doses to the staph as well.
Be mindful of X-ray 2 placement.
If the X-ray tube is placed above the
table,
be sure to use portable shielding to
protect the staph head and eye exposures,
and this also applies to oblique and
lateral positions as well.
Limit magnification use.
Use collimation to image only the
essential anatomy of clinical interest.
Lower pulse rates.
Whenever practical.
DSA and CNA acquisitions should be used
sparingly and always place the image
receptor as close to the patient as
possible.
Thank you.
Thank you everyone and and welcome back.
They two really started off fantastically
with this great panel.
Just just heard some great talks on
protecting women in practice.
And I want to bring, you know,
these questions are this panel is really
for everyone who is who is on the call.
And so we really want everyone to be
involved.
If you have a question,
just put the question in.
Certainly we're going to we're going to
dive into some to some deep dialogue
joined here by my Co Co director Bella
Housing,
interventional radiologist and and and
vascular surgeon.
Lot of expertise in this area.
We have Linda Watkins who is a consultant
pediatric interventional radiologist as
well from from Glasgow.
We have doctor Rhian Davies,
complex interventional coronary operator,
South Span, Pennsylvania,
to Ryan complex interventional
cardiologist again from Baylor,
Scott and White.
And then Allison Sipley.
She is a medical physicist and radiation
safety officer in in Florida.
So, so Bella, if you want to,
if you want to take it away and start
asking some questions,
I got a few of my own as well.
Yeah, no, thank you.
Thank you so much to all our speakers.
This is wonderful to have such a variety
in a mix.
Now I've got few selfish questions for me.
Ladies, in terms of your training,
whether it be doctor or non medical,
what would you say the biggest advocates
and the help that you got that allowed
you to maintain your profession and
maintain confidence in this field?
Just because I know we've got lots of
young female audience here and I guess
they need somebody to look up to and
ideas for support.
So if there's anything you would like to
share in that term, I'd be very grateful.
I don't mind opening up.
So I think for me actually it was,
it was actually my male colleagues.
So I went through the the whole of my
interventional radiology training as the
only woman in my department.
I'm the first female IR consultant in my
department and things as well.
But honestly,
it just kind of felt like it didn't
matter.
It was never, you know,
it was never a big deal to the men that I
worked with.
The they were always very good.
I think a lot of them are also married to
women who are in medical careers and
things like that as well.
And so it was never a department of men
whose wives did all of the work at home
and did all the child raising and,
you know,
and kind of things like that as well.
So even my male colleagues, trainees,
you know,
at at whatever time they would say to
them, oh,
are are you a nursery pick up today?
Do you need to go?
And we've just always had that,
that it didn't matter what the gender of
the person was.
There was a recognition of work life
balance of the the extra medical and
extra.
Work commitments that everyone had and
therefore that was applied to everyone.
And I think that actually made a really
big difference in feeling,
in feeling like your your male colleagues
are on your side as well.
I agree with you, Linda.
I think as I've gone through training,
I started probably in a very much male
dominated specialty around me in the
general cardiology realm.
And then when I got to do my
interventional year,
I had a female mentor and that was like
my first exposure to it.
And now I think the female space within
interventional cardiology is growing.
So we look around at conferences and we
look around in the workplace and there's
more and more of us out there.
So it's kind of incredible,
but I think that mentorship probably
started more so from the our male
counterparts.
But as time is going on,
I think we're starting to see more and
more female faces out there.
So it's great.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Doctor Davies and Doctor Watkins,
I agree with both of the things that you
guys said.
But I would also like to add that some of
our biggest support as early trainees and
women trainees are,
are actually the Cath labs,
scrub techs and nurses that have been in
the lab and been around radiation much
more than we have as we've entered our
our careers there.
And they have seen kind of where
radiation protection has gone from and to.
I think they are also equally excited to
see that evolution as we move the space
forward for protecting not only those at
the table, but all of those around us.
So I think that's a great source of
support as well our our staff members
that have been in the lab for a lot
longer than we have.
Thank you guys.
What would you say your biggest challenge
thus far in your career being a woman?
And within that challenge,
what tools or what,
how did you manage to navigate them?
If you don't mind sharing that experience
just in case if there's a youngster or
somebody going through similar challenges
now,
maybe they can find inspiration or or
utilize these similar tools.
I think that's a great question.
And to be honest with you,
when I first announced to my general
cardiology fellowship that I wanted to
enter interventional cardiology,
I was quickly told that is no place for a
woman.
And the,
the main barrier there that they felt was
truly the radiation exposure,
maybe a little bit of the work life
balance and the concern that it's going
to be really hard to have a family and be
on call every other night,
which is truly not the case.
But with that being said,
I think it's sometimes a matter of
finding the folks that truly believe in
you and know that this career is for
everybody or anybody that wants to do it.
And then, you know,
maybe maybe having a little bit of thick
skin too, and,
and hearing those comments and ignoring
them as you kind of steer ahead with a
focus on entering the space.
Yeah, I would second that.
Sorry.
No, no, go right ahead, Doctor.
I would, I would second that,
Doctor Davies,
even in the medical physics field,
there's very few female radiation safety
officers.
There's very few female medical
physicists.
And I think the times are changing, right?
In more recent years,
we're starting to see more women in the
field, more women in practice.
But yeah, it's,
it's if you don't break the molds, right?
And you don't cut through that barrier,
no one else will, right?
And so even if we don't see faces like
our own when we start in our career,
there's no reason why we we can't push
through and and be the first be the
mentor for others.
Right.
Thank you.
Yeah.
I was just going to say that sometimes
just being a woman, my height,
I'm probably most women are a little bit
shorter than our male counterparts in the
lab.
And so I think a physical barrier was was
just being a sort of vertically
challenged operator.
But I think as we open the conversation
of what Doctor Davies said,
how she was told it just wasn't a place
for women,
changing that conversation to it can be a
place for women.
It is a place for women.
And then how do we continue to make it
and even and better place for women?
I think as well as that,
I think you're totally right that women
supporting women is a huge part of this.
Because actually, if you,
if I answer very honestly in terms of
what were the biggest barriers to me
doing IR, it was probably other women.
It was women in the diagnostic sphere of
radiology who told me that, that, that,
you know,
or was I really sure and how you'll
change your mind and you might want to
rethink that, you know,
and things like that.
It was never anyone in the interventional
space actually, you know,
like I said that, you know,
my male colleagues there were always
incredibly supportive.
But actually, I found that it was,
it was other women who had different
goals, different ideas,
different different perspectives of what
they wanted for their life,
actually trying to impose that on me.
And,
and I think that really kind of opened my
eyes into just how important it is to,
to really just make sure that you're not
dismissive.
You know, even if someone come, you know,
a,
a junior can come along and say that they
want to do something that to you sounds
like the most boring thing on earth.
But you can still be positive to them
about that and encourage them,
encourage them in that and things.
And I think that's really important,
particularly in a space like this that is
still quite male dominated.
Yeah, I think from my end,
it's just to add to say that it's OK for
it to be challenging.
It's OK to struggle to balance family
life with IR.
It's OK that some weeks are horrendous
between on call and managing life outside
the on call.
But not every single woman's the same.
Everybody's different.
Their support system is different.
And what might be easy peasy for me may
not necessarily be for XY and Z.
So definitely agree with the support,
just be happy,
provide that support and let that junior
decide for themselves if that future
works for them and empower them with the
tools.
I think,
and I'm glad that there is now more flexi
working.
There's a lot more availability of part
time because everything passes.
We go through phases in life where you
may want part time for that period of
time and then you'll go back to full time.
It's it's normal.
Everybody's different.
Some may need it,
some may absolutely not need it,
but we won't know unless we're in it.
And to be in it,
we have to be allowed to be in it or at
least given the opportunity to be in it.
And that's my message for anybody
watching this, not, don't be disheartened.
Don't think it, it will be an easy ride.
It may not be,
but then it may be a very easy ride.
We don't know that that will be for you
to decide and work out,
but definitely we'll be here to support
Bob.
Do you have any questions before I end up
selfishly taking more of my own questions?
I know you've had some.
I absolutely did.
And I'm certainly not worthy to be with
this group,
but I represent our certainly our male
counterparts.
You know,
I do think that that it is really a
tragedy that we don't have more women in
these fields.
I think we're missing an enormous amount
of talent and, and for cardiology,
I don't know what it's like across the
world,
but certainly in the US and for
cardiology, it, you know,
it's down in the 4% range.
And so we're really missing a lot of,
a lot of really good frontline hands on
talent now.
You know, our staff is really dominated,
I think by women and they're getting more
radiation than we are because they're in
there every day.
And, and to,
I think the Doctor Ryan's point,
I thought it was very interesting just
talking about the,
the shorter stature and, and, you know,
the inability to really to raise the
table because you have to be comfortable
in these labs.
And I think it's it, you know,
creates more radiation.
And so should there be something that
either in the designs and the new designs
of some of these imaging,
imaging technologies or certainly now
that we have newer technologies for,
for blocking radiation and reducing your
risk.
I guess my question is how do you think
we can go forward to make it a safer
place even it's safer than it is now?
What do you think are like the first
steps and second steps and maybe some
long term steps that we can get so that
five years from now it's a much safer
place for women to practice?
I think a big step of that is,
is research alone.
You know,
I know there's been a lot of smaller
studies that have been done out there
with wearing dose radiation badges on our
gowns and that sort of thing and using
different protective devices between US
and the radiation systems.
But I think more that are dedicated to
female and for folks that are maybe
pregnant and in the radiation space,
just to give that reassurance that it is
in fact safe.
I think the more data that is collected
with time,
the more reassurance that women entering
the space are,
are good to go and there shouldn't be any
fear.
And I think forums like the ones we're
having this weekend, I think group chats,
I think, you know,
speciality breakout sessions at these
conferences that we all attend to bring
up this topic is super important.
I think the narrative has always been I
can't work in the Cath lab because I want
to be pregnant.
Well,
we've seen that data has come out and
we've seen with proper techniques,
proper shielding,
proper policy that it is safe for women
to be in the radiation lab.
And so as we start to take that
conversation and say, yes,
but how do we make that even more
protective?
You know,
I think I think there is some
psychological discomfort when you're a
woman stepping into a male dominated feel,
a male dominated space and you have to
declare, you know,
that you would like this extra shielding,
this extra policy.
That alone is, I think,
part of the barrier.
You know, we have the physical barrier,
but then there is the emotional and the
psychological barrier.
And I think it was as my participation as
a trainee and then now as as a graduated
training to to continue to see those
conversations happening ongoing.
Even just last week on a women's chat.
I'm a part of a early career training
asked around, you know,
I would like to get pregnant,
but I'm starting my my Cath lab rotation
and multitudes of women responded ** year
career here.
I had X number of babies during X number
of years of training.
So I think getting the voice out of the
women who have successfully been in the
lab and been able to raise family and be
an example and a forefront for those who
are wanting to to to follow that path as
well.
I'd love to hear that positive feedback
from other women in the same position.
Absolutely.
Education is key when women are are
thinking about family planning.
It's so important to educate yourself
beforehand, right?
We can, as a physicist,
we can look at your badge readings.
If you're wearing your decimeter
appropriately,
we can give you an estimation of what we
would expect to see over the course of
the next nine months.
We can also give to educate yourself
right Look at your badge reports.
If you're a double badge wearer,
the the badge that you're going to be
mostly concerned with is going to be the
one that you're wearing under the lid at
the chest level.
That's going to give you the best idea of
what you could expect for a fetal badge
reading.
If you're a single badge wearer and
you're wearing your your badge above your
lead, you can estimate about 30% of that.
That's going to be your deep dose
equivalent.
So that's,
that's what you want to look at to kind
of see where you're at, right?
If,
if you're looking at family planning in
the US,
the limit for pregnancy is going to be 5
millisieverts or 500 milligram for the
course of the pregnancy.
And, and even furthermore,
we like to see about 50 milligram per
month, right?
And so educate yourself,
look at what your current readings are
and,
and take the steps necessary to start
reducing your dose if you can now,
right before,
before you find yourself pregnant and,
and that emotional and psychological
stress starts to hit right?
Oh no, what,
what can I do now to reduce rate?
Do it now.
Do it,
Do it before you find yourself in that,
in that emotional situation of,
of being pregnant and,
and the fear that that may come with that
in, in your, your position in,
in the Cath lab in,
in a radioactive fields, right.
I think somebody said,
I'm not going to take credit for it,
but maybe four years ago or so in a
conference in Texas that if each
department catered for a pregnant female
with large breast tissue,
if you catered for that,
you will protect everybody.
So if your goals were pregnant female
Millie Sieverts and you catered that for
everybody, then everybody wins.
And I think that that's that was a really
important message that I took home.
That's so true.
If you just treated everybody as a
pregnant female with large breast tissue,
so you've got to make sure the gowns are
everything fitting, everything's well,
then you've protected everybody who
you've left out.
And that's, you know,
an aim that I think all of us should
reach because everybody would win.
I mean,
it's not exclusive to just a pregnant
female also protect male colleagues.
Absolutely.
So does anybody want to add anything to
any of the juniors right now?
I,
I know I'm focusing mostly on the juniors
because I know there's a lot of concerns.
Anything motivational,
anything to tell them?
I mean,
I always say it's probably the most
amazing career interventional,
whether it's radiology, cardiology,
anything interventional is the most
amazing career ever.
And it's, you know,
radiation should never be the thing to
stop you.
But is there anything,
any wisdom that you would like to share?
I think that's a really important message.
I mean,
there is not a day that I regret coming
into this specialty.
You can change the course of a patient's
life in a matter of moments.
It's,
it's absolutely incredible what we get to
do with very much a short time of knowing
patients that are super sick sometimes
when they come rolling into our Cath lab
and we open up a blockage that restores
blood flow to the majority of their heart.
And if anybody tells you not to do it,
make sure that's ultimately your decision
that you don't want to do it.
Because if there's even a hint that you
want to do it,
I think you'll forever regret not just
doing it.
Yeah, I think I definitely echo that.
Like, I absolutely love my job.
Can't really imagine doing anything else.
And is it hard?
Yeah, But that's OK.
We can do hard things.
And.
But it's incredibly worthwhile.
And I don't think there is anything in
life that's worthwhile,
that is easy and that's OK.
I'd like just to add that, you know,
for not just our female or and male
juniors,
but what Doctor Davies is saying is
having a little bit of thick skin.
I think when you step into the space and
you show that you are kind and caring and
you care about your patients and you want
to do good work,
you will get the support from the staff,
from the techs, from the nurses,
from your both your female and male
colleagues.
So I think first and foremost,
stay positive about your journey into
this career and secondly about having
that thick skin.
It doesn't necessarily mean being tough
and rigid.
It's simply just speaking up.
I think when you you take the time and
columnate or you take the time and you
ask for all the Shields,
all the protection,
you take the time to explain to your
staff, it's not just protecting me,
it's protecting you,
it's protecting the patient.
And when I think you keep it focused with
positivity, patient care,
and also staff centered and not just me
centered,
I think the support that you find around
yourself will be insurmountable.
And I think it just motivates you to
continue your trajectory in your career
as well.
So take the time to speak up.
You know, sometimes my male colleagues,
as I was cathering with them were a lot
taller than me.
And I would ask them, you know,
can we compromise on this table height?
And they were more than happy to when you
let the the staff know that, hey,
may I have the shield put on the table?
May I have this rag pad put on this table?
May I have this radiation protection
device put on the table?
They are happy to do it once you explain
that it's a benefit for everyone in the
room, patients, staff.
Thank you.
If that is all,
is there anything you want to add?
Doctor Foster, are we happy to wrap up?
Is there anything else?
Yeah, no, that's great.
So that really ends in.
Thank you.
All that was that was really fantastic.
And and I think, you know,
as we look to the future,
I think we're going to be able to begin
to see some of those changes.
At least I hope.
I hope that it happens now.
I hope it happens quickly and with I
think the momentum that we have of really
just awareness that that it,
it can be a safe place and understanding
radiation,
I think we're going to go a long way with
that.
So the next session is a roundtable
discussion.
We're going to close.
We've got some really wonderful people to
talk about how do we make that change and
who's responsible for that change.
And so we're going to really dive into
that in about 10 minutes.
So so hope to see you all then.
Thank you all.
Thank you.